
# What is cgen?
At its simplest, cgen is a tool that lets you write C code mixed with metaprogramming in JavaScript.

At its finest, cgen is a tool that lets you build higher and higher level abstractions for code generation to help you write C code with less and less effort. 

[Jump to examples](#tutorial)

[Jump to the cooler example](#building-a-class-abstraction)

# Why?
C++ template metaprogramming is Turing complete... But would you ever really want to write a whole program in it?

I've been writing almost exclusively in C++ for work since 2015. Even after having read several books about C++ best practices, API design, design patterns, and so on, I still bump into parts of the language from time to time that leave me scratching my head, rummaging through StackOverflow, and asking coworkers for help. (In the latest case, I was trying and failing to pass a move-only type into a lambda capture for a lambda being passed as a function parameter. Turns out it doesn't work with the standard library - you need something like [unique_function](https://naios.github.io/function2/).) 

About a year and a half ago I was reading through the [ZeroMQ docs](http://zguide.zeromq.org/page:all) for fun (they're a good read, actually, written by Pieter Hintjens, one of the contributors), and came across this tidbit:
>... my preferred language for systems programming is C (upgraded to C99, with a constructor/destructor API model and generic containers). There are two reasons I like this modernized C language. First, **I'm too weak-minded to learn a big language like C++. Life just seems filled with more interesting things to understand.** Second, I find that this specific level of manual control lets me produce better results, faster.

This quote, in addition to the section on [code generation](http://zguide.zeromq.org/page:all#Code-Generation), inspired me and led me down a rabbit hole to the iMatix projects [gsl (the code generation tool described in the ZeroMQ docs)](https://github.com/imatix/gsl), [zproject](https://github.com/zeromq/zproject) and [zproto](https://github.com/zeromq/zproto). 

I was inspired by the concept of ["model-oriented programming" as described in the gsl readme](https://github.com/imatix/gsl#model-oriented-programming). I loved the idea that the programming language itself is the wrong layer of abstraction for solving certain problems, and that just because you *can* add a feature to a language doesn't mean you *should*. The concept of using models plus code generation seemed very appealing. 

I played around with zproject and zproto but there were a few drawbacks. First, navigating a project made with zproject proved difficult. It's a hassle to move between generated code (with disclaimers at the top saying not to modify anything), partially generated code (where the function signature was autogenerated but not the body), and model files. This was the primary issue. XML also isn't my favorite thing in the world, but had everything else been dandy I would have played along.

So, I ditched it, but continued writing things for fun in C on the side, with this idea of model-oriented programming floating around in the back of my brain. 

But then, I came across [ribosome](http://sustrik.github.io/ribosome/), another code generator written by the main author of ZeroMQ, Martin Sustrik. I used it for something small at work and it turned out to be a pleasure to use. Another year passed, I thought about it again, used it again, and then I was off to the races with cgen. My goal was to allow model-oriented programming to be mixed in with ordinary C code in the same file format, so that looking at the generated source code would be largely unnecessary. As a bonus, it was a natural extension to equip it with the ability to generate a Makefile (or whatever build tool I chose) from the same format.

# Core Concepts

From the perspective of cgen, a C program can be divided into a few key components, each of which can be described by a JSON object. The following list describes each component and its corresponding properties:
* **module**: Describes a .h/.c file pair. Used for code and makefile generation.
  * **executable**: Whether the module should be compiled to an executable. If true, a main()
                function will be automatically defined in the .c file. See 'entry point'
                below for more details.
  * **project\_deps**: The names of other modules defined in the project that this module
    depends on. This will automatically add #includes to the header file of the
    module (for now) and wil automatically add the necessary linking dependencies to the
    Makefile for the module.
  * **external\_deps**: The names of other header files that should be included from
    projects not written in the cgen format. (Makefile integration not yet
    implemented, i.e. this file will be #included but will not add the
    appropriate "-I" flag to the compiler command if it's necessary.)
  * **external\_libs**: The names of other libraries that need to be linked into
    this module. (Not yet implemented.)
* **function**: Declares/defines a function
  * **name**: The full name of the function
  * **module**: The module the function belongs to
  * **visibility**:
    * 'public': Declares the function in the .h file for the module, defines it
      in the .c file
    * 'private': Declares and defines the function in the .c file and marks it
      'static'
  * **compiler\_directives** (optional): A list of things like "inline" to precede the function signature, static should never be necessary though
  * **inp**: Object of the form ` { argName : argType, ..., lastArgName : lastArgType } `
  * **out**: Specifies the return type of the function
  * **def**: Contains the body of the function in ribosome format
* **struct**: Declares/defines a struct
  * **name**: The name of the struct
  * **module**: The module the struct belongs to
  * **visibility**:
    * 'public': Declares the struct in the .h file for the module. Also declares
      'typedef struct Foo Foo;'.
    * 'private': Declares 'typedef struct Foo Foo;' in the .h file, and
      declares/defines the struct in the .c file
  * **data**: Object of the form ` { fieldName : fieldType, ..., lastFieldName : lastFieldType } ` defining the fields of the struct.
* **entry point**: A function to be called directly from main(). This is required
  for a module that's executable. The function currently must accept no
  arguments and return void but later on should accept command line arguments
  and return an int. (I also don't love this interface so it may change).
  * **name**: The name of the function (should be defined elsewhere separately).
  * **module**: The module for which this function is an entry point. This module definition must have specified "executable: true".
* **enum**: Declares/defines an enum
  * **name**: The name of the enum
  * **module**: The module the enum belongs to
  * **visibility**: 'public'/'private'
  * **entries**: An object of the format ` { name : value, ... } ` for each enum entry. Also
             accepts a list of names if the default values may be used.
* **type**: An alias in JavaScript for a type in C. When a type is defined with
  defineType, the type will be accessible from anywhere as 't.MyAlias'. This 
  currently does **not** define a typedef in C.
  * **name**: The alias for the type
  * **ctype**: The corresponding C type for the alias
* **metatype**: A JavaScript function that takes in a type (which is just a string) and outputs
    a new type string. When defined, the metatype will be accessible from
    anywhere as ` mt.MyMetatype(t.SomeOtherType) `. An easy example of this would
    be ` mt.Ptr(t.Int) ` as a pointer to an int. It would expand to "int \*". 
    Unions could also be defined this way.
  * **name**: The name of the metatype
  * **func**: Function from type to metatype name
* **constant**: A free-floating key-value pair to define as a constant.
  * **name**: The name of the constant
  * **module**: The module the constant belongs to
  * **visibility**: 'public'/'private'
  * **value**: The value of the constant.
  
# Tutorial

In order to fully understand everything, it would be helpful to read or at
least skim the [ribosome](http://sustrik.github.io/ribosome/) documentation. If
you don't feel like doing that right now, just know that lines preceded with a
dot ('.') get sent to a file, with macros being JavaScript variables or
functions surrounded by '@{}' that get inserted in-line.

All of the below examples can be found in full in the [examples](https://www.github.com/saltzm/cgen/examples) directory.

## Using the lowest level interface

Here's an example of the use of the raw interface (spoiler alert: we can make this less verbose later) to implement a basic array class for integers:

```c
defineType({
  name: "Int",
  ctype: "int",
})

defineType({
  name: "Size",
  ctype: "int",
})

defineType({
  name: "Nothing",
  ctype: "void",
})

defineMetatype({
  name: "Ptr",
  def: function(T) { return T + "* "; }
})

defineModule({
  name: "IntArray",
  executable: false,
  project_deps: [],
  external_deps: ["assert", "stdio", "stdlib"],
  external_libs: []
})

defineType({name: "IntArray", ctype: "IntArray"})

defineStruct({
  name: "IntArray",
  module: "IntArray",
  visibility: "private",
  data: {
    // The size of the array
    size: t.Size,
    // The data in the array
    data: mt.Ptr(t.Int)
  }
})

defineFunction({
  name: "IntArray_Create",
  module: "IntArray",
  visibility: "public",
  inp: { size: t.Size, init_value: t.Int },
  out: mt.Ptr(t.IntArray),
  def: () => {
.    IntArray *self = malloc(sizeof(IntArray));
.    assert(self);
.    self->size = size;
.    self->data = malloc(self->size * sizeof(int));
.    assert(self->data);
.    for (size_t i = 0; i < self->size; ++i) {
.      self->data[i] = init_value;
.    }
.    return self;
   }
})

defineFunction({
  name: "IntArray_Destroy",
  module: "IntArray",
  visibility: "public",
  inp: { self_ptr: mt.Ptr(mt.Ptr(t.IntArray)) },
  out: t.Nothing,
  def: () => {
.    assert(self_ptr);
.    assert(*self_ptr);
.    IntArray *self = *self_ptr;
.    free(self->data);
.    free(self);
.    *self_ptr = NULL;
  }
})

// Gets the size of the array
defineFunction({
  name: "IntArray_GetSize",
  module: "IntArray",
  visibility: "public",
  inp: { self: mt.Ptr(t.IntArray) },
  out: t.Size, 
  def: () => {
.    return self->size;
  }
})

// Gets the value at an index of the array
defineFunction({
  name: "IntArray_Get",
  module: "IntArray",
  visibility: "public",
  inp: { self: mt.Ptr(t.IntArray), idx: t.Size },
  out: t.Int, 
  def: () => {
.    assert(idx < self->size);
.    return self->data[idx];
  }
})

// Sets the value at an index of the array
defineFunction({
  name: "IntArray_Set",
  module: "IntArray",
  visibility: "public",
  inp: { self: mt.Ptr(t.IntArray), idx: t.Size, val : t.Int },
  out: t.Nothing, 
  def: () => {
.    assert(idx < self->size);
.    self->data[idx] = val;
  }
})
```

## Defining an executable

Let's add a test executable for our IntArray class:
```c

defineModule({
  name: "IntArrayTest",
  executable: true, // This should be executable, yay. See entry point below.
  project_deps: ["IntArray"], // Need to include *and* link to IntArray
  external_deps: ["assert", "stdio", "stdlib"],
  external_libs: []
})

defineEntryPoint({
  name: "RunTests",
  module: "IntArrayTest"
})
```

And then define a function to run tests:
```c
defineFunction({
  name: "RunTests",
  module: "IntArray",
  visibility: "private",
  inp: {},
  out: t.Nothing, 
  def: () => {
.   // Test that IntArray_Create creates an array with the correct size
.   {
.     size_t size = 3;
.     int init_val = 0;
.     IntArray* arr = IntArray_Create(size, init_val);
.     assert(IntArray_GetSize(arr) == size);
.     IntArray_Destroy(&arr);
.   }
.   // Test that IntArray_Create correctly initializes all values
.   {
.     // Let's use the macro now
.     size_t size = 3;
.     int init_val = 0;
.     IntArray* arr = IntArray_Create(size, init_val);
.     for (size_t i = 0; i < IntArray_GetSize(arr); ++i) {
.       assert(IntArray_Get(arr, i) == 0);
.     }
.     // Yay more macros
.     IntArray_Destroy(&arr);
   }
  }
})
```

## Getting fancy with macros

But what if we got FANCY!? Let's play with macros. The way ribosome works is
that you can define a JavaScript function that contains in its body lines
beginning with a '.' which will be sent to output. Then, in any line preceded
with a dot you can call that function like '@{myMacro()}' and it will
substitute the text from that function in place.

As an example, let's write a macro for setting up a test, tearing down a test, and running a test. To run a test, we can pass in the just the body of the test as a function, and automatically do setup and teardown. I'm not even arguing that this is the best way to do anything, but it's so plastic and fun it makes me happy to play with:

```c
var setUpIntArrayTest = function(size, initVal) {
.  size_t size = @{size};
.  int init_val = @{initVal};
.  IntArray* arr = IntArray_Create(size, init_val);
}

// This isn't that useful but let's do it for fun anyways
var tearDownIntArrayTest = function() {
.  IntArray_Destroy(&arr);
}

function defineIntArrayTest(size, initVal, testBody) {
.  {
.    @{setUpIntArrayTest(size, initVal)}
.    @{testBody()}
.    @{tearDownIntArrayTest()}
.  }
}

var testThatCreateCreatesAnArrayOfTheCorrectSize = {
  size: 3,
  init_val: 0,
  body: () => {
.   assert(IntArray_GetSize(arr) == size);
  }
}

var testThatSetCorrectlySetsTheValueAtTheRightIndex = {
  size: 3,
  init_val: 0,
  body: () => {
.   size_t idx = 0;
.   int val = 3;
.   IntArray_Set(arr, idx, val);
.   assert(IntArray_Get(arr, idx) == val);
  }
}

var tests = [testThatCreateCreatesAnArrayOfTheCorrectSize, 
             testThatSetCorrectlySetsTheValueAtTheRightIndex]

defineFunction({
  name: "RunTests",
  module: "IntArrayTest",
  visibility: "private",
  inp: {},
  out: t.Nothing, 
  def: () => {
    tests.forEach(function(test) {
.     @{defineIntArrayTest(test.size, test.init_val, test.body)} 
    })
.   printf("All tests passed!\n");
  }
})
```

## Running cgen

In order to run cgen you'll first need to download the JavaScript version of [ribosome](http://sustrik.github.io/ribosome/).

Create a file `package.js.dna` in the same directory as ribosome.js and cgen.js.dna containing the following: 
```
./!include("IntArray.js.dna")
```
and run 
```
node ribosome.js cgen.js.dna
```

What do we get as a result? A header and implementation file for each module, and a makefile with targets to build everything and run the tests. The makefile generation currently is pretty rudimentary but it works.

## Building a class abstraction

The beauty of having a program represented as a bunch of JSON objects is that it's really easy to build higher and higher level abstractions. For example, it's easy to recreate the above IntArray class in the following (less verbose) way:

```c
// This is needed just so we can use t.IntArray below. Somewhat unfortunate.
defineType({name: "IntArray", ctype: "IntArray"})

defineClass({
  name: "IntArray", // This will define a module called IntArray for us
  struct: { // This will be called IntArray and will be private
    // The size of the array
    size: t.Size,
    // The data in the array
    data: mt.Ptr(t.Int)
  },
  metadata: {
    project_deps: [],
    external_deps: ["assert", "stdio", "stdlib"],
    external_libs: []
  },
  api: {
    Create: {
      inp: { size: t.Size, init_value: t.Int },
      out: mt.Ptr(t.IntArray),
      def: () => {
.       IntArray *self = malloc(sizeof(IntArray));
.       assert(self);
.       self->size = size;
.       self->data = malloc(self->size * sizeof(int));
.       assert(self->data);
.       for (size_t i = 0; i < self->size; ++i) {
.         self->data[i] = init_value;
.       }
.       return self;
      }
    },
    Destroy: {
      inp: { self_ptr: mt.Ptr(mt.Ptr(t.IntArray)) },
      out: t.Nothing,
      def: () => {
.       assert(self_ptr);
.       assert(*self_ptr);
.       IntArray *self = *self_ptr;
.       free(self->data);
.       free(self);
.       *self_ptr = NULL;
      }
    },
    GetSize: {
      inp: { self: mt.Ptr(t.IntArray) },
      out: t.Size,
      def: () => {
.       return self->size;
      }
    },
    Get: {
      inp: { self: mt.Ptr(t.IntArray), idx: t.Size },
      out: t.Int, 
      def: () => {
.       assert(idx < self->size);
.       return self->data[idx];
      }
    },
    Set: {
      inp: { self: mt.Ptr(t.IntArray), idx: t.Size, val: t.Int },
      out: t.Nothing, 
      def: () => {
.       assert(idx < self->size);
.       self->data[idx] = val;
      }
    }
  },
  tests: {
    "IntArray_Create creates an array with the correct size": () => {
.     size_t size = 3;
.     int init_val = 0;
.     IntArray* arr = IntArray_Create(size, init_val);
.     assert(IntArray_GetSize(arr) == size);
.     IntArray_Destroy(&arr);
    },
    "IntArray_Create correctly initializes all values": () => {
.     size_t size = 3;
.     int init_val = 0;
.     IntArray* arr = IntArray_Create(size, init_val);
.     for (size_t i = 0; i < IntArray_GetSize(arr); ++i) {
.       assert(IntArray_Get(arr, i) == 0);
.     }
.     IntArray_Destroy(&arr);
    }
  }
})
```

This generates the files IntArray.h/c, IntArrayTest.h/c, and a makefile with a target for building all modules and a target for running the tests (`make test`).

## Getting more opinionated with our class design

The above example (and the corresponding examples in examples/class_interface) gives a good example of a basic class abstraction. However, there are a few more things that we could make our class abstraction do for us. 

First, behind the scenes, the generator for the above class abstraction checks that functions called Create/Destroy exist, and that Create returns a pointer to the class type and that Destroy takes in a pointer to a pointer of the class type and returns void. If I'm going to enforce this anyway, I might as well not require the user to type those signatures in every time. 

Second, we have to include a pointer to self as the first input parameter of every member function. We can remove that and have it added behind the scenes. Yay for less typing!

There's also some things in the constructor that we'll need to do for every class we write - allocate memory for the object itself, assert that exists, and return self. Similarly for the destructor. 

And, while we're add it, what if we want every object of all of our classes to have a reference count, and then have the destructor decrement the refcount before freeing memory, and then define a function IncRefCount to increment the refcount? Let's do it. 

This is the result: 

```c
defineClass({
  name: "IntArray", // This will define a module called IntArray for us
  struct: { // This will be called IntArray and will be private
    // The size of the array
    size: t.Size,
    // The data in the array
    data: mt.Ptr(t.Int)
  },
  metadata: {
    project_deps: [],
    external_deps: ["assert", "stdio", "stdlib"],
    external_libs: []
  },
  api: {
    Create: {
      inp: { size: t.Size, init_value: t.Int },
      def: () => {
.       self->size = size;
.       self->data = malloc(self->size * sizeof(int));
.       assert(self->data);
.       for (size_t i = 0; i < self->size; ++i) {
.         self->data[i] = init_value;
.       }
      }
    },
    Destroy: {
      def: () => {
.       free(self->data);
      }
    },
    GetSize: {
      inp: {}, // self will be defined as a param behind the scenes
      out: t.Size,
      def: () => {
.       return self->size;
      }
    },
    Get: {
      inp: { idx: t.Size },
      out: t.Int, 
      def: () => {
.       assert(idx < self->size);
.       return self->data[idx];
      }
    },
    Set: {
      inp: { idx: t.Size, val: t.Int },
      out: t.Nothing, 
      def: () => {
.       assert(idx < self->size);
.       self->data[idx] = val;
      }
    }
  },
  tests: {
    "IntArray_Create creates an array with the correct size": () => {
.     size_t size = 3;
.     int init_val = 0;
.     IntArray* arr = IntArray_Create(size, init_val);
.     assert(IntArray_GetSize(arr) == size);
.     IntArray_Destroy(&arr);
    },
    "IntArray_Create correctly initializes all values": () => {
.     size_t size = 3;
.     int init_val = 0;
.     IntArray* arr = IntArray_Create(size, init_val);
.     for (size_t i = 0; i < IntArray_GetSize(arr); ++i) {
.       assert(IntArray_Get(arr, i) == 0);
.     }
.     IntArray_Destroy(&arr);
    }
  }
})
```

And let's check out some generated code for once (comments added post
generation for demonstrative purposes):

```c
#include "IntArray.h"

#include "assert.h"
#include "stdio.h"
#include "stdlib.h"

struct 
IntArray { 
    int size;
    int* data;
    int ref_count; // YAY!
};

IntArray*
IntArray_Create(int size, int init_value) {
    // Check out all this stuff that was automatically added!
    IntArray* self = malloc(sizeof(IntArray));
    assert(self);
    self->ref_count = 1;
    self->size = size;
    self->data = malloc(self->size * sizeof(int));
    assert(self->data);
    for (size_t i = 0; i < self->size; ++i) {
      self->data[i] = init_value;
    }
    return self;
}

void
IntArray_Destroy(IntArray**  self_ptr) {
    assert(self_ptr);
    assert(*self_ptr);
    IntArray* self = *self_ptr;
    // Come on... This is cool, right??
    self->ref_count--;
    if (self->ref_count == 0) {
      free(self->data);
      free(self);
      *self_ptr = NULL;
    }
}

int
IntArray_GetSize(IntArray*  self) {
    return self->size;
}

int
IntArray_Get(IntArray*  self, int idx) {
    assert(idx < self->size);
    return self->data[idx];
}

void
IntArray_Set(IntArray*  self, int idx, int val) {
    assert(idx < self->size);
    self->data[idx] = val;
}

// HERE COMES THE DYNAMITE
void
IntArray_IncRefCount(IntArray*  self) {
    self->ref_count++;
}
```

## Templated Types

"But wait! How can we implement containers that are GENERIC?! Surely it must be nigh
IMPOSSIBLE!"

Don't worry dear reader, I have heard your voice through the ether and thus, I
give you the magic codez for implementing templated types....!: 

```js
// Container for metaclasses
mc = {}

defineMetaclass = function(obj) {
    assert(!mc.hasOwnProperty(obj.name), 
        "Cannot redefine metaclass '" + obj.name + "'")
    mc[obj.name] = obj.template
    defineMetatype({
        name: obj.name,
        def: obj.instance_name
    })
}
```

"No! It can't be! How is it possible?"

Yes, my friend, take a looksie at the usage of such devices and marvel:

```c
// An object to be passed to "defineMetaclass"
var ArrayMetaclass = {
  // This will add Array to a global variable 'mc' (short for metaclass) so
  // that you can declare a new instance as declareClass(mc.Array(t.MyType))
  name: "Array", 
  // This will define a metatype called Array for us so that mt.Array(t.MyType)
  // will return "MyTypeArray"
  instance_name: function(T) { return capitalize(T) + "Array" }
}

/**
 *  T is the type of the element we're storing 
 */
ArrayMetaclass.template = function(T) { 
  // The name of the class that will be generated from this template
  var ElementArray = ArrayMetaclass.instance_name(T)

  return {
  name: ElementArray,
  metadata: {
    project_deps: project_deps,
    external_deps: ["assert", "stdio", "stdlib"],
    external_libs: []
  },
  struct: { 
    // The size of the array
    size: t.Size,
    // The data in the array
    data: mt.Ptr(ElementType)
  },
  api: {
    Create: {
      inp: { size: t.Size, init_value: ElementType },
      def: () => {
.       self->size = size;
.       self->data = malloc(self->size * sizeof(@{ElementType}));
.       assert(self->data);
.       for (size_t i = 0; i < self->size; ++i) {
.         @{ElementArray}_Set(self, i, init_value);
.       }
      }
    },
    Destroy: {
      def: () => {
.       free(self->data);
      }
    },
    GetSize: {
      inp: {},
      out: t.Size,
      def: () => {
.       return self->size;
      }
    },
    Get: {
      inp: { idx: t.Size },
      out: ElementType, 
      def: () => {
.       assert(idx < self->size);
.       return self->data[idx];
      }
    },
    Set: {
      inp: { idx: t.Size, val: ElementType },
      out: t.Nothing, 
      def: () => {
.       assert(idx < self->size);
.       self->data[idx] = val;
      }
    }
  },
  // We can't really define tests
  // in the Array metaclass since we don't know necessarily how to e.g. initialize
  // elements without knowing what their type will be.
  tests: {}
}}

// Actually define the thing so we can see it from other places
defineMetaclass(ArrayMetaclass)
```

Okay, that's all well and good, but how is it *used*? Let's look at the tests:
```c
// Let's make an array of doubles just for testing. 
TestArray = mc.Array(t.Double)
TestArray.tests = {
  "DoubleArray_Create creates an array with the correct size": () => {
.   size_t size = 3;
.   int init_val = 0;
.   DoubleArray* arr = DoubleArray_Create(size, init_val);
.   assert(DoubleArray_GetSize(arr) == size);
.   DoubleArray_Destroy(&arr);
  },
  "DoubleArray_Create correctly initializes all values": () => {
.   size_t size = 3;
.   int init_val = 0;
.   DoubleArray* arr = DoubleArray_Create(size, init_val);
.   for (size_t i = 0; i < DoubleArray_GetSize(arr); ++i) {
.     assert(DoubleArray_Get(arr, i) == 0);
.   }
.   DoubleArray_Destroy(&arr);
  }
}

defineClass(TestObjArray)
```

But what if we want our Array to also be able to hold objects and destroy the objects it contains when it's destroyed? This will also let us see the refcounting in action. We can modify the above as follows:

```c
/**
 *  T is the type of the element we're storing, or the name of the
 *  class if we're storing objects as elements. 
 * 
 *  elements_are_objects is a boolean flag indicating whether we're storing
 *  objects of a class. More on that below.
 */
ArrayMetaclass.template = function(T, elements_are_objects = false) { 
  // The name of the class that will be generated from this template
  var ElementArray = ArrayMetaclass.instance_name(T)
  // We're doing some funny stuff here so I'll explain. I want to have this Array
  // work if I'm storing primitive types AND if I'm storing objects of a class.
  // So I have this boolean parameter elements_are_objects that the caller
  // of defineMetaclass can use to say if this array is storing objects or not.
  // If we're storing objects, internally we'll store a pointer to the object
  // type, and inside Destroy we'll iterate through them and call
  // ElementType_Destroy on each of them to clean up the memory. Since our
  // objects are all refcounted, and we increment the refcount when we add an
  // element to the array, this should be fine! 
  if (elements_are_objects) {
    var ElementType = mt.Ptr(T)
    var ElementClass = T
    // We need to include the header containing the definition of the class
    var project_deps = [ ElementClass ]
  } else {
    var ElementType = T
    var project_deps = []
  }

  return {
  name: ElementArray,
  metadata: {
    project_deps: project_deps,
    external_deps: ["assert", "stdio", "stdlib"],
    external_libs: []
  },
  struct: { 
    // The size of the array
    size: t.Size,
    // The data in the array
    data: mt.Ptr(ElementType)
  },
  api: {
    Create: {
      inp: { size: t.Size, init_value: ElementType },
      def: () => {
.       self->size = size;
.       self->data = malloc(self->size * sizeof(@{ElementType}));
.       assert(self->data);
.       for (size_t i = 0; i < self->size; ++i) {
.         // While it would be silly to pass in a pointer to an existing
.         // object as the initial value, we'll pass it to the Set path
.         // to make sure the refcount is incremeneted enough times
.         @{ElementArray}_Set(self, i, init_value);
.       }
      }
    },
    Destroy: {
      def: () => {
        // If the elements are objects we want to destroy them all. For our
        // non-object arrays (like arrays of primitive types) this code won't
        // be generated!
if (elements_are_objects) {
.       for (int i = 0; i < self->size; ++i) {
.         // We can do this because our class abstraction enforces
.         // the same destructor API across all objects.
.         @{ElementClass}_Destroy(&(self->data[i]));
.       }
}
.       free(self->data);
      }
    },

    ...

    Set: {
      inp: { idx: t.Size, val: ElementType },
      out: t.Nothing, 
      def: () => {
.       assert(idx < self->size);
if (elements_are_objects) {
.       if (val) {
.         @{ElementClass}_IncRefCount(val);
.       }
}
.       self->data[idx] = val;
      }
    }
  },
  tests: {}
}}

defineMetaclass(ArrayMetaclass)
```

And we can test it using objects as follows: 
```c
defineType({name: "TestObj", ctype: "TestObj"})

// Create an object that contains a pointer to an int, so we can signal
// that we were destructed by setting the int to 0 in the destructor
defineClass({
  name: "TestObj",
  metadata: { /* ... */ },
  struct: { 
    // A pointer to an int we'll use to see if we correctly
    // destructed
    my_int: mt.Ptr(t.Int)
  },
  api: {
    Create: {
      inp: { my_int: mt.Ptr(t.Int) },
      def: () => {
.       assert(self);
.       self->my_int = my_int;
      }
    },
    Destroy: {
      def: () => {
.       // Zero out element so we can tell from the outside that
.       // the object was destructed
.       *(self->my_int) = 0;
      }
    }
  }, 
  tests: { /* Nah */}
})

// Let's make an array of TestObjs, being sure to pass elements_are_objects =
// true
TestObjArray = mc.Array(t.TestObj, true /*elements_are_objects*/)
TestObjArray.tests = {
  "TestObjArray_Destroy calls destructor of TestObj": () => {
.   int size = 1;
.   TestObj* init_val = NULL;
.   TestObjArray* arr = TestObjArray_Create(size, init_val);
.
.   int test_int = 42;
.   TestObj* test_obj = TestObj_Create(&test_int);
.
.   TestObjArray_Set(arr, 0, test_obj);
.   // Since we're refcounting, we need to destroy this first
.   TestObj_Destroy(&test_obj);
.   TestObjArray_Destroy(&arr);
.   // If we correctly destroyed the TestObj in the destructor, 
.   // this int should be set to 0
.   assert(test_int == 0);
  }, 
  "TestObjArray_Set increments refcount": () => {
.   int size = 1;
.   TestObj* init_val = NULL;
.   TestObjArray* arr = TestObjArray_Create(size, init_val);
.
.   int test_int = 42;
.   TestObj* test_obj = TestObj_Create(&test_int);
.
.   TestObjArray_Set(arr, 0, test_obj);
.   TestObjArray_Destroy(&arr);
.   // Refcount should be non-zero so this shouldn't have been affected
.   assert(test_int == 42);
.
.   TestObj_Destroy(&test_obj);
  },
}

defineType({name: TestObjArray.name, ctype: TestObjArray.name})
defineClass(TestObjArray)
```

# Closing thoughts

What I find really cool is that to build the raw interface took only about 200 lines of JavaScript (with the help of ribosome), and then building a layer on top of it (completely separate!) to implement the above class abstraction (plus templated classes) only took an extra 100 or so lines of JavaScript! 

If I wanted to implement a way to enforce inheriting interfaces described by a JSON object (I don't, yet), it would probably only be an additional 50 lines or so. Inheritance of fields in a struct, or actual function definitions? Easy. Want to do make all of your classes add a reference count to their struct and have their destructors always check the reference count before actually freeing memory? Easy. Enforcing a consistent style across files becomes much easier.

Another nice thing is that if you don't like writing raw JSON like this, it's fairly easy to create your own file format (or use an existing format like YAML) and convert it to JSON before running the generator. Building extra tooling around it shouldn't be difficult either.

# Future work
* Improving Makefile generation or switching to another build tool
* Building up a library of models and utilities
* Experimenting with alternate file formats
* Porting cgen to use the ruby version of ribosome (for ruby enthusiasts)


